rucirakampitakuṇḍalamaṇḍala: suciramīśa nanartitha pannage |
amaratāḍitadundubhisundaraṃ viyati gāyati daivatayauvate ||1||
rucira-kampita-	beautifully quivering
kuṇḍala-maṇḍala:	the ear ornaments
suciram-īśa	for long O Lord!
nanartitha pannage	(Thou) danced on the serpent's (hoods)
amara-tāḍita-	the gods beat
dundubhi:-sundaram	the drums sweetly
viyati gāyati	in the skies sang
daivata-yauvate	the celestial damsels
O Lord! With Thy ear ornaments quivering rhythmically, Thou danced for long on the hoods of the serpent. As the gods in the sky beat the drums, the heavenly damsels sang in accompaniment.
namati yadyadamuṣya śiro hare parivihāya tadunnatamunnatam |
parimathan padapaṅkaruhā ciraṃ vyaharathā: karatālamanoharam ||2||
namati yat-yat-	drops down that which
amuṣya śira:	his (Kaaliya's) head (hoods)
hare	O Hari!
parivihāya tat-	leaving that
unnatam-unnatam	the raised raised one
parimathan pad-paṅkaruhā	trampling by Thy feet lotus like
ciraṃ vyaharathā:	for long (Thou) played around
karatāla-manoharam	clapping beautifully
O Hari! Thou played around for long, leaving the drooped down head and jumping on the raised ones. Thus Thou trampled hood after hood with Thy lotus feet. Thou danced around in this manner keeping time with the clapping of hands beautifully.
tvadavabhagnavibhugnaphaṇāgaṇe galitaśoṇitaśoṇitapāthasi |
phaṇipatāvavasīdati sannatāstadabalāstava mādhava pādayo: ||3||
tvat-avabhagna-	(when) by Thee crushed
vibhugna-phaṇāgaṇe	and so drooping were the many hoods
galita-śoṇita-	(when) the flowing blood
śoṇita-pāthasi	made red the waters
phaṇipatau-avasīdati	the serpent king got exhausted,
sannatā:-tat-abalā:-	prostrated his wives
tava mādhava pādayo:	(at) Thy, O Maadhava, two feet
The group of hoods were crushed by Thee and were drooping. The blood flowing from them rendered the waters of Yamunaa red. The serpent king was totally exhausted. Thereupon, O Maadhava! His wives prostrated at Thy two feet in all humility.
ayi puraiva cirāya pariśrutatvadanubhāvavilīnahṛdo hi tā: |
munibhirapyanavāpyapathai: stavairnunuvurīśa bhavantamayantritam ||4||
ayi purā-eva	O Lord! Even long ago
cirāya pariśruta-	for a long time, having well heard of
tvat-anubhāva-	Thy greatness
vilīna-hṛda: hi	with their immersed hearts, indeed,
tā: munibhi:-api-	they, by the sages even
anavāpya-pathai:	unattained ways
stavai:-nunuvu:-	with (such) hymns praised
īśa	O Lord
bhavantam-ayantritam	Thee, unrestricted
O Lord! Long ago, and for a long time the serpent wives had well heard of Thy majestic greatness. And so their minds were absorbed in Thee. Without any restrain, they hailed Thee with hymns of praises of a kind which are beyond the powers of even great sages.
phaṇivadhūgaṇabhaktivilokanapravikasatkaruṇākulacetasā |
phaṇipatirbhavatā'cyuta jīvitastvayi samarpitamūrtiravānamat ||5||
phaṇi-vadhū-gaṇa-	the serpent wives'
bhakti-vilokana-	devotion seeing
pravikasat-karuṇā-	with overflowing compassion
ākula-cetasā	filling Thy mind
phaṇipati:-bhavatā-	the serpent king by Thee
acyuta	O Achyuta!
jīvita:-tvayi	let to live, unto Thee
samarpita-mūrti:-	surrendering himself
avānamat	prostrated
O Achyuta! Thy heart was overflowing with compassion on seeing the devotion of the serpent wives. With Thy mind welled with such compassion Thou let the serpent king live, who then surrendering himself unto Thee, prostrated before Thee.
ramaṇakaṃ vraja vāridhimadhyagaṃ phaṇiripurna karoti virodhitām |
iti bhavadvacanānyatimānayan phaṇipatirniragāduragai: samam ||6||
ramaṇakaṃ vraja	to Ramanaka (island) go
vāridhi-madhyagaṃ	(situated) in the ocean's centre
phaṇi-ripu:-na karoti	the enemy of the snakes (Garuda) will not do
virodhitām iti	enmity', thus
bhavat-vacanāni-	Thy words
atimānayan-	respectfully obeying
phaṇapati:-niragāt-	the serpent king departed
uragai: samam	the other serpents along with
Thou then told him to go to the Ramanaka island situated in the centre of the ocean. There the enemy of the snakes, Garuda would not do him any harm. Respectfully obeying these words of Thine, the serpent king departed along with the other snakes.
phaṇivadhūjanadattamaṇivrajajvalitahāradukūlavibhūṣita: |
taṭagatai: pramadāśruvimiśritai: samagathā: svajanairdivasāvadhau ||7||
phaṇivadhūjana-	the serpent wives
datta-maṇivraja-	gave (Thee) many gems
jvalita-hāra-	making resplendent the necklaces
dukūla-vibhūṣita:	and by silk garments adorned
taṭa-gatai:	on the banks who were (waiting)
pramadāśru-vimiśritai:	with joyful tears mingling (sight)
samagathā: svajanai:-	Thou went with Thy folk
divasa-avadhau	at the day's end (evening)
The serpent wives gifted Thee many gems, resplendent necklaces and silk garments. Adorned with these, towards evening, Thou joined Thy folk, who were waiting for Thee on the banks with their sights mingled with joyful tears, and went with them.
niśi punastamasā vrajamandiraṃ vrajitumakṣama eva janotkare |
svapati tatra bhavaccaraṇāśraye davakṛśānurarundha samantata: ||8||
niśi puna:-tamasā	(when) in the night, again because of darkness
vraja-mandiraṃ	to the Vraja houses
vrajitum-akṣama	to go were unable
eva janotkare	certainly, the group of people
svapati tatra	(they) were sleeping there
bhavat-caraṇa-āśraye	in Thy feets' shelter
davakṛśānu:-	a forest fire
arundha samantata:	surrounded all around
In the darkness of the night the group of people were unable to go back to their houses in Vraja. So they were sleeping there on the banks in the shelter of Thy feet. Just then they were engulfed by a forest fire.
prabudhitānatha pālaya pālayetyudayadārtaravān paśupālakān |
avitumāśu papātha mahānalaṃ kimiha citramayaṃ khalu te mukham ||9||
prabudhitān-atha	who were awakened then
pālaya pālaya-iti-	save, save us thus
udayat-ārta-ravān	raising piteous tones
paśupālakān	the cowherds
avitum-āśu	to protect, quickly
papātha mahānalam	(Thou) drank the great fire
kim-iha citram-	what here is surprising
ayam khalu	this (fire) is indeed
te mukham	Thy mouth
The Gopas were awakened and raised piteous tones of 'save us, save us', in alarm. To quickly protect them, Thou drank in that great fire. What is so surprising in this? Thy mouth, indeed, is fire itself.
śikhini varṇata eva hi pītatā parilasatyadhunā kriyayā'pyasau |
iti nuta: paśupairmuditairvibho hara hare duritai:saha me gadān ||10||
śikhini varṇata: eva	in the fire by colour only
hi pītatā	indeed is yellowness (Peetataa)
parilasati-adhunā	it exists now
kriyayā-api-asau	as an action (Peetataa) also in this (fire)
iti nuta:	thus praised
paśupai:-muditai:-	by the cowherds (who were) delighted
vibho	O All pervading Lord!
hara hare	eradicate, O Hari!
duritai: saha	along with the sins
me gadān	my ailments
The yellowness 'Peetataa' was only an adjective of fire. By Thy having drunk it, it has also acquired the verb adjective of Peetataa, to be drunk. O All pervading Lord! The delighted cowherds thus praised Thee. O Hari! Deign to eradicate my ailments along with my sins.